Today is the 28th of April 2023 and I'm here at the home of Mrs Pauline Walton at Hazelmere,
Hazelmere House, Hazelmere Estate in Rairdale.
Thanks very much for inviting me into your home Pauline and I think we're going to have a very interesting chat from what I can gather.
First of all, do you mind if I ask you your date of birth?
The 6th of October 1940.
Thank you, thank you very much. Now I understand you're not originally from Rairdale, you're very much a native now, but can you tell me a little bit about your early life?
Yes, I was born and grew up in Clendring de Dwells, down Tremont Road, one of a family of seven children, most of them still alive.
I had a wonderful upbringing in Clendring Dodd because the great outdoors was your playground.
We had the lake in Clendring Dodd and there used to be boating on the lake and lots of different things going on up there and the rock park, which was a wonderful playground.
I attended the local national school in Clendring Dodd and at the age of 11, I passed my 11 plus to go to the grammar school.
I stayed there until I was 17. I didn't stay on for my A levels.
I had to leave because by now my mum and my father had divorced and my mum was bringing up the family on her own.
So I needed to be a breadwinner in the family.
And so I didn't go for further education.
I came and worked for the family.
One of the things my sister always tells me that the first new pair of shoes she ever had was when I started work and was able to buy her from Edie's in Clendring Dodd a little pair of red shoes.
She always reminds me of that.
Later on, I started to work at the Metropole in Clendring Dodd in the reception and had many wonderful years there working with the Baird Murray family.
And they were so kind, so helpful.
They always kept in touch with me.
I stayed there until my first born Christian was born.
And then I had to give it up, intended to go back.
And within 18 months I was expecting my second child Justin, so I didn't go back.
Oh, thank you for that introduction.
Now, let's find out why you came to Reader all those years ago.
The dances in Clendring Dodd were always held at the Rock Park Centre.
No alcohol, tea, coffee, sandwiches and cakes by two local ladies.
And there was always a live band.
We were very lucky in Clendring Dodd that there was Mr. Samuels and Mr. Sheen.
And they were always on the QE2, I think it must have been QE1 or QE2 liner over to America.
So they learned, they were a band on board the ship.
They learned all the later songs and everything.
Then when they came back for a rest, they would go down the Rock Park and play.
And I was there as a 16-year-old when a young man, well, young man, Cliff was six years older than me, asked me to dance.
And I looked at him and in those days you didn't see many men in beautiful suits,
white shirts and tie turned out, you know, they were all a little bit scruffy.
So I turned him down and it wasn't until a year later that I saw him again.
And this time I decided, yes, I would dance with him.
At the end of the evening he asked me, can I walk you home?
And I said, oh no, I live a long, long way from here.
It's a long walk. Oh, no problem.
I've got transport.
So we went outside and there was a motorbike and sidecar.
And I said, there's no way that I'm getting, I'm getting him back to go home.
But he encouraged me.
So that was my first time on a motorbike, which actually became one of the stays of our family in later life.
Both my sons and my grandson are all big motorbike enthusiasts.
So that's where I met Cliff.
And then we got married in 1961 and I came to live in Raerder.
Our first home was with Mrs. Woods, the mount.
That would be Pam Wood's, Pam Pahl's mother in a little flat, one up, one down, a pound a week.
And it was lovely.
And that's where Christian was born.
He was born in that first flat.
And then Bringoey came up for sale.
It had been a children's home for many, many years.
And Cliff loved it, loved the building, loved the look of it.
And Radnorshire District Council was selling it.
So he decided they were asking for offers.
So he's decided he put an offer in.
We talked about it and took a little bit advice.
And four thousand pounds was about the right sort of figure.
Cliff was born on the 19th of September.
So I said, no, I said, don't just put the, bear four thousand, put four thousand and nineteen pounds, which he did.
And he got it.
As luck would have it at that time, we didn't know what we were going to do with it.
So William Holcro were building the Clwedwg Dam in Llanidloes.
And they'd got all their key workers wanting somewhere to live.
So we quickly turned it round into flats for the workers.
I helped.
And I'm pulling up the floorboards one day.
I found lots of little notes there from the children, from the children's home that they had posted between the floorboards to their parents asking them to come and take them home.
And messages to Father Christmas and things like that.
And that really, really upset me.
So we lived down.
We moved from the mount, moved into Bringui.
And we had many, many wonderful years down there.
By then, Cliff had built on the tennis court five houses.
And he let some of those to the key workers from Sir William Holcro's and local people.
One was John Price, the reporter for the County Times and his wife.
And then we had Mr.
Mrs. Ellis.
And he was a schoolteacher at Brinterion.
And then the others were key workers on the Clwedwg, the work.
Wonderful memories, wonderful times.
None of Bringui was built then.
Right opposite was a field.
And that was owned by Lluingulam Farm, I think.
You know, and it wasn't so many, many years later after we left Bringui.
That that became a building site.
And Bernard Lloyd and his sons built all the houses and the bungalows there.
Well, Bringui in itself has such a fascinating history.
It's a wonderful point that you were part of all that.
Oh, yes.
Now, what exactly brought Cliff's family to this part of the world in the first place?
Because they're certainly not from anywhere near here originally.
No, no, no.
They were Northumbrian people from up north.
Grandad had worked for Sir Edmund Nuttall, the engineering firm all over the country for years,
until they found that they were going to build the Clarewind Dam in the Ellam Valley.
All the key workers came down to have a look in the bad, bad winter of 1947.
And Dad thought he'd gone to hell. He always told me.
He said it was so cold.
Anyway, they decided they would take the job on.
And the key workers all came down earlier.
They were housed locally, some in Dolgurtham,
some in Nantmadug at the back of the Ellam Valley Hotel, and some in the village.
So Dad then, the family all came with Dad.
Prior to that, they'd been in Trakeen in Carmarthenshire,
where the Admiralty had been building a massive, massive tunnel out into the mountain
to keep all the armaments from the Second World War, you know, all the bombs and things.
So they moved up to Raerder and went to live in Nantmadug.
Dad, Clip's first job, my husband, his first job was an apprentice electrician on the Clarewind,
as many others did.
They had wonderful, wonderful amount of people.
Where I live now, Hazelmere, was the home of Frank Worthing, and Frank run a bus service.
And he would travel all over Breckenshire, Radnyshire, Montgomeryshire,
picking up people, workers, every day to bring in and take up the Ellam Valley to work.
So there were thousands and thousands.
Grandad said the hardest workers up there always was the Irish boys.
They were absolutely wonderful.
But he said they were drinkers.
And he said at the end of the month, when it was payday, they would come down into town,
they would go to Percy Hughes', which is Richard Hughes' father's shop, than grandfathers in town.
They were gents' outfitters.
They would buy a new suit, a shirt, a tie, socks.
They would disappear over to Llandrindod, to the log cabin, which was at the back of the Commodore Hotel.
They would spend the weekend there.
They'd come back to work on a Monday morning in the same clothes that they'd been in all weekend.
And they would live in those for the next month until payday again.
And so the Hughes' did very, very well out of the workers of the Clairewyn Dam.
But they did have, grandad said as a foreman, he wouldn't allow any alcohol on, you know.
And then, of course, they had all those wonderful stonemasons from Italy when they came over
and they were doing all the front of the dam.
And they were absolutely amazing workers.
So that's really how dad came to Riddar.
They stayed in Riddar because the oldest daughter started courting a local boy, Henry Bryce.
And Henry and Margaret were talking about getting engaged and getting married.
And Nana Walton, Olive Walton, decided it's time to put down roots.
And so she wanted to buy a place in Riddar out from Nant Naddauk to live.
Dulgerth and Bungalows were all key workers' bungalows for people working on the Clairewyn Dam.
And she decided that when they became empathy, she would like one.
So she went to see the clerk and she said, listen, when they become available, I would like one.
No problem, Mrs. Walton. How are you going to pay for it?
Is it possible to take it out of Albert's wages every month?
No, no problem at all.
So the money for buying Six Doll Girth and was taken out of Albert's wages every month.
And he never knew because in those days, they would hand the men, would hand the wage packet
complete without taking a penny out of it to the wife.
And the wife looked after the finances.
So that's how they got Doll Girth.
And so the family then settled in Riddar.
The one son married Shirley Williams from the drill hall.
I married Cliff.
My sister-in-law, Olive Bennett Evans, married Simon Bennett Evans.
And my other sister-in-law, Margaret, married Henry Price, who had an electrical firm in Llanidlois, a shop in Llanidlois.
He also had a little shop in Riddar, where Bob the Butcher's was and now Watson's the Butcher's.
And he decided that it was not doing any good and he was going to give it up.
By this time, Cliff had left the Clairewyn, was working for Henry as an electrician,
and decided he would take the shop on.
He took it on, just working for Henry during the daytime and then doing all the work for the shop in the evenings.
It soon became obvious that it was too small, that he needed somewhere bigger.
So he bought Paris House in Riddar, which is now where the Chinese takeaway is.
That soon became too small and then Kimberley Cafe became available to sell, to buy, sorry.
So he bought that and built a massive extension, an 8,000 square metre extension on the back.
And this was now when Colour Television came to Riddar.
And that was the making of the business, Colour Television.
Not many people could afford to buy Colour in the beginning, so we would rent and hire Purchase in the beginning.
I can honestly say that most of the televisions in Riddar and the community were from Cliff Shop.
They were so good that Joe tells me some of those televisions in the farms are still going strong today.
We always went for brand makes. We went for Sony and Toshiba and Itachi.
They stayed the course and they were wonderful.
Sorry, can I?
Pauline, you've been mentioning quite a few places in the area now.
For the benefit of our listeners, could you just explain how far away the Clioin Dam actually is?
From Riddar, is it about six miles or more?
I would think about six miles.
Yeah, about six miles from Riddar. In the Ellum Valley, the top end of the Ellum Valley.
Going slightly south-west, isn't it?
That's right, yes.
A river going into the Ellum, the Clioin.
And you mentioned the Butcher's Shop. Where exactly is that in Riddar, please?
Next door to the library in South Street, opposite the Ellum Hotel.
That would be West Street, would it?
Sorry, West Street.
And the Dolgurtham Bungalows, where would we find those?
In East Street, halfway along.
The post office on your right-hand side, the Bear Hotel on your left-hand side.
The next turning on your left was six bungalows built for key workers, building the Clioin Dam.
And those are called Dolgurtham.
And at the top of that lane is Dolgurtham House itself, which is a sorry sight at the moment,
because they had a fire there many years ago.
But it was a beautiful building.
The youth club used to be there. All the guide people would be there.
It was well used, and now it's just empty and looking dreadful.
Very sad indeed.
And Paris House you mentioned, where would we find that?
If you go up into North Street, Daisy Powells is next to Cliff Walton & Sons shop, Euronics.
And the next place down to that is Butique in Northbrook.
And next to that is Paris House, and that is now a Chinese takeaway.
Interesting how they all change.
Oh yes, yes.
Now you've mentioned the relationship now between Henry and your husband, Cliff.
I believe they became builders in the area. Can you give us some details about that?
Yeah. Where we live now, Hazelmere House, came up for sale.
And there was a lovely lady, Mrs. Evans, living here with her family.
And she was getting quite elderly, and she wanted to sell.
So we bought Hazelmere House, and we bought the four fields that were around,
which are now Hazelmere Estate.
And it was called Hazelmere because the road into Hazelmere House itself,
a great big hazel, and nut trees growing all on the side of the road,
and that's why it was called that.
But we were the last buildings on St. Harmon Road. Above us there was nothing.
There was no pen, mace, nothing.
It was wide open right up to the top of the hill.
So we bought that, and we came here to live in 1972,
and Cliff started building on the fields around the house.
Trying to remember how many, 24, 25 bungalows.
Lovely estate, and they were steel-built bungalows then.
There was no wood inside.
They were just steel frame, which was, you know, quite innovative in its day in the 1970s.
So that's how we came to live at Hazelmere.
And I'm still living here.
But during our time, before we moved to Hazelmere, we bought Brungawee,
which is now a nursing home in Raerdy in South Street.
And we bought that from Radnor District Council in the late 60s, early 70s.
And we turned it into flats.
And on the tennis court, we built some houses on the tennis court.
But the key workers for the Cloedeg Dam there in Llanidlois came to live at Brungawee House.
And after we left there, we sold it to Nancy Hickley, who used to run the Ellen Hotel in Raerdy.
And she just lived there with the flats as her home.
Right. If we could just go back to the valley for a couple of minutes.
You tell me an interesting story about something that Cliff did for a bet.
Are you able to tell us that little story again?
Yeah. He was a young man, apprentice electrician on the Clairewyn.
And it was not long before the official opening.
And they'd had some water over to try it out.
And then it was shut off.
And they bet him for £5, would he climb up the centrepiece of the Clairewyn Dam,
which he did. They used to remind him of that in years to come about him doing it.
Quite an interesting anecdote indeed.
Yeah.
Right. Can you tell us a little bit about how the electrical business that you started grew in Raerdy?
Because it's quite a big concern now.
Yeah. My husband Cliff was an electrician.
And he worked after the Clairewyn was opened and finished.
He worked for his brother-in-law, Henry Price, W.H. Price in Llaneddlois.
And it was at the time where not many farms had got electricity in Montgomeryshire over to Aberystwyth, a massive area.
And so that's what he would do.
So we got to know a whole area and people in Montgomeryshire and in Ceredigion as well.
And so he worked for Henry until Henry had a little place that Mrs. Walton and Anna Walton used to look after,
where Bob the Butcher's was and now Watson's.
And he used to just have people coming in.
And there were messages, this has gone wrong, that's gone wrong, not so much sales, you know, service shop really.
And he was going to close it.
And Cliff said, no, don't don't do that. I'll keep it on.
So Cliff took it and he noticed that people were wanting much, much more than just servicing.
So he started selling appliances out there, washing machines and tumble dryers.
And then it was too small. So Paris House came up for sale in North Street.
That was Mrs. Meredith's, a coal merchant's next door.
And a little bit of interest because on the side of Paris House, there's a lane,
a right of way running right to the back of Paris House into Northbrook next door.
And that's still there today. And that's how they used to bring the coal in.
So that's up the side of the Crown Hotel.
And it wasn't much longer before that got too small.
And Kimberley Cafe came up for sale.
Kimberley Cafe was a wonderful, wonderful building.
And in on holiday weekends, there'd be seven, eight mile tailbacks of traffic coming into Rader.
People from the Midlands being out to the coast for the day.
The first place they would see for somewhere to eat was the Kimberley Cafe in Rader in North Street.
That was open sometimes until midnight. People would be in there eating.
Anyway, the people who were running that decided they were getting too old and they wanted to give it up.
So we bought Kimberley and transformed it.
We built a 8,000 meter extension on the back, some flats above the shop.
And that's where we moved into. That would be what?
In the late, in the early 1970s, 1974, 75.
And then it was the Advent Color Television.
And that really made the shop what it is today because everybody wanted color.
And it was rental. It was HP.
A lot of people couldn't get a signal locally.
Even an aerial on the roof of a house couldn't get it.
So Cliff used to do pipe television and he would go all over Radnyshire, Breckinshire, Montgomeryshire.
He would spend days and hours looking for a good strong signal, sometimes on the top of a massive hill.
And then he would dig a trench from the top of the hill down to the farmhouse or the dwelling, bring the cable down.
And that's where they would get that's where they get their signal.
You know, so easy was that a life today.
But that was hard work.
So that's how the business came into being.
And now both my sons and my grandson and my daughter-in-law work for it.
And I have to mention Katrina, who came out of school at the age of 16.
She's now 57 and she's still with us in the in the shop, a local girl.
And we couldn't do without her.
Well, the Walden's van is a very prominent feature, a very prominent vehicle in this area.
They're forever lasting doing deliveries all over this part of Wales and further out there.
So your family will obviously keep it on for years to come, I would imagine.
I would hope. Yes.
Well, thanks ever so much for telling us about the build up to all these businesses and the interest in the buildings in Raerdyd.
Talking about living now in Raerdyd and bringing up a family in Raerdyd, what changes have you yourself seen in Raerdyd?
Can you point out any specific changes?
There's so many over the years.
The community is not what it was when I was growing up, when I was living in, started to live in Raerdyd.
And you knew everybody.
What I find now, I know I'm getting older, but what I find now, I can go downtown, I can walk the street.
If there's somebody my age, group fine.
But the young people, I don't know anymore.
That wasn't like that in the 1960s, the 1970s.
You knew everybody on the street.
You knew their name. You knew their family.
It was a very close-knit community.
And we used to have quite a group of men, about eight or ten men, every day would be on the corner of North South Street there, just standing, watching the world go by.
And if you wanted to know anything about what was happening, you only had to speak to them.
A lovely lot of banter with them every time you pass by, being teased.
But the shops is the theme.
We had so many shops.
You didn't need to go out of Raerdyd.
We had everything in Raerdyd then.
And Eddie Collard's, the butcher in the centre of Raerdyd.
I remember going there on a Saturday, two and sixpence, for a piece of meat for Sunday lunch.
That would do your Sunday lunch.
It would do your Monday meal and sandwiches for the family for a couple of days as well.
They had some wonderful shops in Raerdyd.
And now we haven't got them.
Big changes in the town.
Oh, yes. Yes.
Big, big changes.
And not for the better.
Not for the better.
This is a beautiful house where you live, Pauline.
Can you give us a few more details about the house, when you think it may have been built, et cetera?
Yeah, I think Hazelmere was built by Bowen Hamer, who was, I don't know whether he was an accountant or a solicitor.
And he ran a business from here.
There was a building out in the yard and he ran a business from here.
But he dealt mainly with farmers.
And later on, he started selling animal feeds as well from the building.
He built it and he lived here with his family.
And I don't know what happened.
I was told he went bankrupt.
But anyway, the house was sold.
And I think Birmingham Corporation bought it.
They put one of the engineers for the dam.
Whether it would be the first dam, must have been the first dam, I should imagine.
I don't know the name of the engineer.
They lived here.
There were a couple of owners over the years.
Then Mrs. Evans was a housekeeper to Mr. Thomas, who had bought Hazelmere.
Mr. Thomas was from the Kashanth family in Raider.
And he lived here.
He was a bachelor.
And Mrs. Evans was his housekeeper.
When he died, he left the house to her.
And in turn, when Mrs. Evans was wanting to move, she left the house to my husband, Cliff.
Cliff, in turn, then, involved his brother-in-law, Henry Price, in the buying of Hazelmere in the beginning.
Because there was a lot of land involved.
There was a couple of acres, about three or four acres, all around the house,
which they started to develop as a housing estate, Hazelmere estate.
And then Cliff bought the house outright for us to live in.
And that was in 1972, 1973.
And that's when we came here to live in Hazelmere.
We've been here ever since.
Beautiful place, beautiful setting.
Again, very interesting history of the house.
You were mentioning the first dam before.
Would that be the Cabin Cook Dam?
Yes.
The first one we see going up in the valley.
What do you do for entertainment in Raider, then, Pauline?
How do you relax?
We're very lucky, really.
We have Callard, which has always got something going on in Raider to get involved with and to visit.
I'm a big supporter of the Wives side in Bilth Wells.
They have some very good do's there.
Now the Pavilion in Llandrindod has got some wonderful venues there.
And also Theatre Brechenog in Brecon I go to a lot.
But in town, I belong to the WI.
As I'm getting older, I don't do as much as I used to.
I joined the WI in 1972.
The chairman at that time was the president at that time was Maisie.
It was Maisie, no, I don't know who the president was then.
But the secretary was Maisie Andrews, the garage.
And the secretary was Maisie Williams, the drill hall.
And it was Maisie who was mother to my sister-in-law, who involved me in the WI.
And it wasn't long before I became WI president.
And except for bringing up my daughter, who was born in 1981, I've been a lifelong member.
I had a few years off bringing up my daughter.
But if you want to know what's going on in the vicinity, join the WI.
Well, you've obviously had a very happy and productive life.
You've been a big influence in the community of Raerdyr.
So thank you very much for sharing all of your experiences
and giving us a lovely idea of the history of Raerdyr and the neighbouring Ellyn Valley.
So thank you again.
Thank you.